# Design decision: 6502 emulation

## Act 1: A naively unexpected roadblock

Originally, my plan here was to emulate the actual 6502 CPU within the game.

I actually have managed to do that – the code in this version of the source contains an emulation of the 6502 (using the rust library `mos6502`), able to write text to a window by writing bytes to a specific region of memory (`0x0200` onwards, if you want to play around with it).

There are two big blockers here now, though.

The first is that I have a few files in my dev folder that I keep having to remember to _not_ add to git. Mainly, a directory called `asm` that has a bunch of 6502 assembly and binaries in it, which I was loading directly in to the emulated chip.

This is messy and I don't like developing this way. But there are ways around that.

The second is that I _massively_ underestimated how much work it would take to get from here to a usable in-game terminal.

I naively assumed that once I had a working 6502 emulation that could print to a screen, _all I would have to do_ would be to load a 6502 operating system onto it, like [GeckOS](http://www.6502.org/users/andre/osa/index.html) or [LUnix](https://github.com/ytmytm/c64-lng), or even just load an actual Commodore ROM onto it.

Yeah, the memory layouts are different, but surely all I'd have to do is go through and manually change the memory locations around?

Well, surprising nobody except me, it's quite a bit more complicated than that. GeckOS requires a 6502 compiler that doesn't seem to have a Windows distribution, and LUnix also needs a GNU-like toolchain.

What's more, the memory maps are just _really complicated_, and there's no easy way of getting the ROMs from existing 6502 machines into a form that can be ingested by the setup I have.

I could set about trying to write my own simple operating system from scratch, but making an OS is, famously, one of the hardest possible things to do in software (up there with writing a compiler).

## Act 2: A reluctant compromise

I have decided, with much sadness, to move away from the idea that the player will interact directly with 6502 emulations in the game, and instead have the interact-able computers just have old-style text _displays_, but just be user interfaces written directly into the game.

I really don't want to abandon the idea of getting the player to write assembly code, though, so I think I will keep the 6502s around, but as _components_ in the game that can be plugged into systems.

In other words, all the automation and programming will still be done in assembly (or similar), but the way the player _interacts_ with these systems will be through a [diagetic](https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/diegetic), but non-emulated, UI.

I'm not _totally_ abandoning this idea, though – this remains an active area of interest for me personally, and I really do like the idea of writing my own OS for a simple system like the 6502! It will just have to be an ongoing side-project, rather than baked into the game from the start, because I don't want to pause development on the game for the years it would take me to get anything remotely close to working.

## Act 3: Final musings

I chose the 6502 because it's famous and it's simple. However, in the medium of a videogame, I have the luxury of not being tied to the real world. I think it's far more likely, therefore, that I will instead opt to create a fake CPU that has useful instructions in it like "send byte to subsystem on robot" or "print byte as debug" (or even "multiply" – the 6502 can't do that!)

6502 assembly is really fun, but there are a few aspects that are really clunky. I do want this to be a faithful and realistic simulation of certain things, but if "simulation" and "game" – or "realism" and "fun" – end up at odds with one another, then "fun" will win out for me.

And, while a part of me loves the idea of having to consult memory location documentation whenever you want to turn an in-game LED on, I think that would reduce the fun quite considerably for many people for not that much gain in faithfulness/realism. I'd much rather let you type `SET EXT $led, 0xff` or something.

I'm going to keep the 6502 in the game for now, simply because that lets me avoid having to write my own CPU from scratch, and I have a toolchain on my computer for writing assembly programs for it. But I imagine I won't keep it in permanently.

Mainly because it doesn't have a multiply instruction.
